in 1886 a competition was announced in
paris
the winner would get the right to design
and build the centerpiece for the
world's fair
of 1889. the company of gustav
eiffel proposed a project that won among
107 others
the first project of the architects from
eiffel's company was a tower with
stonework pedestals
monumental arches between the columns
halls with glass walls on each level
the top shaped like a bulb and plenty of
ornaments
that project was too complicated so they
changed it only leaving the arches at
the bottom
it took a record five months to finish
the foundation
and another 21 to put together the
eighteen thousand metal pieces on top
you can still see it and count them all
when you visit paris
the eiffel tower looks revolutionary
where it stands even today
but back in the late 19th century it was
a real sensation
for which a lot of people criticized it
famous riders called it a tragic street
lamp
a half-built factory pipe and a giant
skeleton
now they weren't too wrong the tower
really has something in common with a
human skeleton
it was inspired by a thigh bone
when they were just beginning to work on
the project eiffel's team faced a
serious problem
they had to make the tower strong enough
to withstand the elements
but at the same time it had to be about
as light as air
if they had made one mistake the tallest
construction in the world at that time
would have collapsed under its own
weight gravity or strong wind
and they had to work with iron which was
a revolutionary new building material
back then
[Music]
around the same time anatomist hermann
von meyer was researching the thigh bone
or
femur it's the longest and strongest
bone in the human body
bones are strong and solid on the
outside and
spongy on the inside the same as bamboo
it grows so tall because it's a hollow
tube made of smaller tubes
that are made of even smaller ones the
bone
just like bamboo takes the load it
carries because of the structures inside
it
their bone fibers arranged in a
crisscross pattern
a swiss engineer carl coleman developed
that concept and created a crane
where patterns like in the thigh bone
were used exactly where support was
needed most
gustav eiffel used that idea and decided
to build his tower
using crisscross patterns of studs and
braces to support the construction
he did some major math and designed it
so that high winds going directly to the
strongest part
the four legs and the flares going
outwards at the base of the tower
looked like the femur upside down the
plan worked out piece by piece
and the construction was finished on
march 31st 1889.
a lot has changed since then in science
and architecture but nature
still inspired cool new inventions and
technologies
this is called biomimicry
for instance the first high-speed rail
in the world the shinkansen running
since 1964
was also inspired by nature when the
train was getting out of the tunnel at
the speed of 185 miles per hour
it produced a sonic boom that noise woke
up people in nearby cities
and scared wild animals a group of
engineers was working to solve this
issue one of them who was also a bird
watcher
suggested making the train more like a
kingfisher
that bird has a long pointed beak that
helps it dive in the water with almost
no splashes when it's hunting
they reshape the front of the train
giving it a sort of beak
and solve the noise problem the new
shape also helps save energy consumption
because it was more aerodynamic and made
the train
10 percent faster the inventor of velcro
was inspired by his own dog
he wanted to find out why burr stick to
its fur so easily and notice
tiny hook-shaped spikes on them under a
microscope
they catch onto different materials with
loops like fur
and fabric george de mistral recreated
that technology
and started his own company back in 1959
ever since the fastening system of nylon
loops attaching to tiny spikes
has been used for many different
purposes
sharks are some of the best swimmers in
the world they are so
fast thanks to their body shape and also
a special kind of skin
covered in small teeth and not scales
scientists created a film based on shark
secret technology
when a ship is covered in it little
marine creatures can't stay attached to
it and so the vessel can travel faster
and save fuel
swimmers wearing swimsuits made of shark
inspired material
also become much faster they also bite
harder
not really brightly colored butterflies
and peacocks
inspired an energy saving technology for
phone displays
these creatures have little structures
on their wings and feathers
when white light shines on them they
reflect different colors at different
speeds
because the surface isn't uniform in
screens based on this idea
the colors also come from reflection the
screen doesn't produce them and saves
energy this way
the colors are still bright and vivid so
it's a win-win
the african namib desert beetle is a pro
at collecting water
it transforms fog into droplets of water
in little bumps on its shell
then it sends the water directly to its
head for drinking
mit scientists and engineers created a
similar structure out of glass and
plastic
it can be used for cooling devices and
to safely clean up toxic spills
now whales are some of the largest
creatures on the planet
and at the same time they're great
swimmers divers and jumpers
their secret is bump protrusions on the
fins that are pretty much like wings
they control the water flow to help the
whale make different maneuvers
scientists decided to use this idea for
wind turbines
tests have shown these whale inspired
turbines are more stable
durable and quieter than regular
turbines
and can generate more energy from wind
and water
elephant trunks have over 40 000 muscles
and are super agile
they can lift heavy loads and do
complicated maneuvers like picking
apples from a branch
trunk design inspired a super safe and
flexible robotic arm
it has a memory and learns to reach and
grab things from its own experience
like a human baby this technology is
already used in factories labs and
hospitals
another kind of robot a squishy one was
modeled after an octopus this robot
doesn't move on a predictable trajectory
like its hard bodied friends
it can curl shrink and change into a new
shape
because it doesn't have fixed joints it
doesn't bump into things
and adapts to any environment no problem
that's why it can be a great help in
rescuing people
bats get around thanks to echolocation
they produce ultrasonic sounds that
bounce off things
and then calculate the distance to those
things
scientists design a similar system to
build into walking sticks for the
visually impaired
it sends out sixty thousand pulses every
second and gets echoes
the stronger the echo the closer the
object is
geckos are super climbers that can move
on all kinds of surfaces
including walls ceilings and glass the
secret to their success
is tons of microscopic hairs that give
them a fantastic grip on any material
scientists decided to use this knowledge
for medical purposes
and maybe to turn humans into spider
humans in the future
the gripping material they design is
activated by
uv light lobsters are delicious
they also have a unique vision their eye
lenses are like
flat mirrors that don't bend light but
reflect it at many different angles
scientists use this principle in
building telescopes
that can focus from different angles in
space
a lobster's vision also inspired x-ray
devices that can see
even through a thick steel wall did i
mention lobsters are delicious
woodpeckers spend their days drumming on
tree trunks but their skulls and brains
somehow stay safe and sound that's
because their beak and skull have many
layers
and some parts of them are soft and
absorb the shock
scientists notice this on ct scans of
the birds heads
and use that knowledge to build a
mechanical shock absorbing system for
micro devices
they can also use it to make insulation
material for spaceships
and protect football players from
injuries
now not all attempts at biomimicry are
equally successful
in the late 1990s mercedes-benz was
looking for a new design idea of an
aerodynamic safe efficient and
maneuverable car
they thought a box fish would be a
perfect role model
it resists the flow of water and stays
on its course even in the rough sea
well what worked well in the sea didn't
work out for a car
it turned out to be super unstable hey
it wasn't failure they just learned one
more way that it didn't work
and went on to try the next thing good
advice